[Music]
so I'm going to flip things on their
heads and start with the credit so much
of this talk came from a piece that I've
just recently written for the
photographer's gallery in London for
their I'm thinking photography platform
so thank you very much to you Anna's Uli
for from photographers gallery who was
the editor for the piece and for my
articles manifest destiny in the digital
age was actually commissioned to be part
of to be coinciding with the solo
exhibition she who sees the unknown by
the artist Martian la yari whose work is
in constant dialogue with the theme of
digital colonialism and also I think
this talk has a lot of relevance to Nora
and Nikolai's presentation so I hope
that some of you saw that this morning
was excellent otherwise I think as a
recording yes so Martians work also is
looking at this as if this theme
especially from the from the point of
view of the digital capturing of
cultural heritage in the Middle East and
the global South by institutions from
the global North which is you know a
parallel from today of the veritable
raiding of culturally significant
artifact that's been going on for
centuries under the guise of
anthropology archeology and cultural
preservation so again nor until I did an
excellent job of describing that this
morning so there's a lot of great work
in decolonization and going on in many
different fields and rethinking the
status quo a lot of that's being led by
artists activists writers and thinkers
and I'd really like to acknowledge the
intellectual leadership of a lot of
amazing people of color like Sarah amid
the world Peru scholar Steve one to
jumper jumper Patrick Wendy Chun Dorothy
Francis Nene a memo to Madison Shaunie
Holloway a Jane and the Australian First
Nations artist and filmmaker Jenny
Fraser who I've had the honor of working
with many times
and many other people who give of their
knowledge and experience online and most
of this talk would not be possible
without the sharing teaching and
guidance of my artistic collaborators
and friends at the wanting our Art
Center in Central Australia so a special
thank you also to Neil Jabril the cook
and silly Louisa Ellis and many more so
historically the language that we use to
describe the Internet is I think really
revealing the Internet is often
described as the new Wild West a new
frontier tech companies and startups on
the cutting edge are entering uncharted
territory the people that push forward
the expansion of network technologies a
digital pioneers and those who are born
into its shadows are digital natives the
myth has been sold to us that the
Internet will emancipate us and social
media and by we or else I mean in this
context to those of us sort of not
technology and of us on the losing end
of the power equation between people and
their data or digital economy so for the
last ten years at least we've been told
that the democratic sharing of
information will make the world more
transparent and thus necessarily more
just forget the fact that algorithms
governing our access to information
through search engines or social media
platforms and just as a little aside
here I often think that there's a reason
why they're called feeds it's a word
that implies a passivity and a
resignation so forget the fact that
these algorithms are proprietary and
utterly untransparent forget fake news
and opaque value driven censorship by
privatized entities also known as social
media companies and most startups these
days forget also that in 2013 the US was
home to eight of the top ten Internet
companies but only 19 percent of their
users and of course do not allow
yourself to consider the implications of
such a one-sided export
of cultural and social ideology and
norms by such a small proportion of the
world's population to the rest of it nor
the amount of personal data that is
flowing back towards the source from the
global users so this is another aspect
of the siren server trope that Jaron
Lane EA described information asymmetry
is power asymmetry and if data is the
new oil in the 21st century then
Internet users are the raw earth from
which that oil is extracted their
commodity to be exploited for the
benefit of the oil barons in this there
is at least some equity amongst users
around the world the parity of the
powerless except that isn't accurate
either the explosion of infinite and de
dual tech industries did not occur in a
historical environment it was built upon
existing inequities and hegemonic power
structures that carry over from the
colonial practices of the last four
centuries this specific international
context combined with the lack of
regulation of the online space has led
to the creation of massive monopolies
operating out of the global North which
exploit the whole world's natural
resources and labor and Hoover up the
data of global citizens to generate more
profit for themselves
and just as an aside to that last slide
there's a whole other aspect to like tax
and tax evasion and where taxes are paid
that's another super interesting rabbit
hole to go down about that helping so
here's a little bit of information
Nigeria is one of the more developed
tech economies in Africa and yet it
imports 90% of the software that are
used that is used in the country Africa
is a continent is home to 14 percent of
the world's population and accounts for
20% of the globe's land surface area but
only 2.6 percent of the worldwide
geotagged Wikipedia articles on every
level from how the human form is
visualized online to the language buyer
circa 60 percent of the Internet is in
English compared to only 10 15
set up the world's population who speak
the language or the recurring
whitewashing and digital pop culture we
see the overwhelming dominance of
northern Western urban anglo-saxon
imagery and values so again this is
something that I really have gotten into
the habit of doing is when I'm when I'm
researching something looking at just a
simple google image search of that
particular thing so this one I think is
a pretty telling example of the way that
they have a hive mind and the internet
the way that it's kind of sees people so
this is just the image that for the
keyword hand we see the stark contrast
between the people who produce the
devices and the depiction of the people
who use the devices we see the
technology arts and they're scantily
covered colonialist tendencies we see
the global North positioning of the
global South and how this gaze is one
that manipulates meaning to better food
a marketing message so for example there
was Facebook's controversial
internet.org program which has since
been rebranded as free basics and the
reason I've got this slide up here at
the moment with the before Pepsi there
was Facebook so that's recent Pepsi ads
that caused a huge amount of controversy
where they're trying to sell their
product by mimicking this kind of
protest well this still this is a still
from an ad that was run in India when
Facebook initially released its internet
Aude org program and its really used
co-opting those same kinds of strategies
of using this idea of leg power to the
people to actually just get people using
their service digitalisation seems
increasingly to be preserving the
existing colonialist power and wealth
structures between the global north and
the global south the internet favors
those with time and money especially
those who speak English and have access
to high-speed Internet and personal
computer so rather than having a shared
computer for example at internet cafes
or only a smartphone as the main source
of internet access
I'd really like to see some of the
Silicon Valley text types trying to do
all their coding on a smartphone it
allows these people to control the
discourse to document the present set
the course for the future and literally
to rewrite history we're living through
an era of a huge orchestrated even if
unintentionally arisia
of marginalized and poorer sections of
the world's population their histories
their culture this is a tool that's
classically used in colonial expansion
and I could talk about this for quite a
long time but I just wanted to touch on
this idea this is one of my
collaborators whose names once a jumper
jumper Patrick he's a well Korea
indigenous Australian man and I'm not
sure how much this audience knows about
colonial Australian history but when the
Wyatt settlers arrived in Australia they
declared the land terra nullius which
means an empty land and so since that
point of time has been incredibly
layered in complex strategies employed
to portray First Nations peoples as
primitive so that ranges from everything
from saying that they wandered the
desert like as though it was this kind
of aimless wandering which it wasn't to
saying that they were hunter-gatherers
which they weren't I mean they they they
gathered things but they also and they
hunted things but they also farmed the
land on a massive massive scale and a
very nuanced and highly developed way
and so this is just a little quote from
from one so when we were in London last
year for an exhibition that we did there
together and the exhibition or the piece
that we did combines traditional designs
as a wall painting in the gallery space
with screens and video works and a whole
lot of selfies by the community members
and in an interview jompa Jinpa said he
referred to the screens as this
so-called technology and i just thought
that it was so perfect because it
encapsulated so much of the kind of
resistance that i was feeling myself
towards this notion of
select this narrative about progress
always with technology and that it's
always this kind of movement forwards or
upwards and also it's focusing a lot to
to an indigenous or you know a well pre
approach to technology which is really
much very much about it's simply another
way to express the same message or the
same messages which come out of culture
and tradition and a deep understanding
of the world and the time so yeah
another thing to maybe add there is that
I think while pre have a particularly
deep understanding of cyberspace because
their cultural heritage is I've heard
arguments about it I wouldn't want to
put words into anybody's mouth but there
is this sense but it kind of exists as a
sort of cyberspace itself because
they're their lives they're living in
this in this world that exists in the
current time but also in the past time
with ancestral spirits and there's this
connection to the land there's a lot of
different aspects that are much less
linear than in chronological than than
our understanding of the world the new
colonial powers are the digital
nation-states of companies like Facebook
Google Apple each with their own
draconian border laws and hostile
foreign policies Facebook makes no
secrets of its designs on Empire it
wants to be the medium through which all
our online communications take place
which is why it's busy buying up apps
and patents across all modes instant
messaging VR AR and more Google's
aggressive expansion into new realms of
business archiving and research is
mercurial creating a vacuum into which
talent competitors and capital alike are
sucked even in its astonishingly
greeting a greedy approach to archiving
though there is a clearly colonial istic
hierarchy of what is deemed culturally
and historically valuable so just as an
example of a vast majority of books
proposed to be scanned for the Google
Books projects are in English
so the closer a user is to the cultural
value assumptions of the fenced off
online territory of the service provider
they're using the more likely they are
to benefit from it however peripherally
the more chance they have of one day
joining its ranks and becoming an
insider and the more validation they
receive from the media they consume the
more culturally culturally relevant
content that is available for them in
fact if you think about this through the
framework of cost or value for money
like for example per megabyte of
culturally relevant content it radically
shifts the value for money of huge
tracts of the internet depending on the
user's background we're living through a
digitally camouflaged rebirth of the
concept of manifest destiny
we are watching one of the world powers
staking out their territory backed by
the armory of their superior computing
power the difference now is that the
maps on which they are drawing lines
chart the turrets the terrain of
attention which translates into earning
potential and above all data so now
we're entering slowly into the hopefully
more upbeat section of this presentation
the guanaco
Art Center is an Aboriginal owned and
operated art and cultural center in the
world pre indigenous community of large
Amaru large ammonium is an incredibly
remote place it's located in Central
Australia about 900 kilometers south of
Darwin and it's about 700 kilometers
from the nearest town services so the
collaboration between the Art Center
which includes dozens of artists and
staff and myself have been consistently
productive since 2012 I visited the Art
Center several times for residency's for
a total of over six months and have also
hosted several artists on a number of
occasions in Germany where where I'm
currently based and Europe and that's
important because this relationship I
think gives us the ability to work on
different kinds of contexts content
so um I wanted to show this image this
is an image that come from a database
that the Art Center and I works have
been working on in the last years so
during the kind of time of working
together over the last at least five
years and deepening this relationship we
began to talk a lot about the innovative
and creative ways that community
community members were using their
phones so in large ammonium as in I
think a lot of parts in Africa and other
in other places around the world very
few people have a personal computer that
they have in their home they access the
internet through smartphones and we
began talking about the way that people
are taking photos and the apps that
they're using to decorate and manipulate
the photos that they're taking and we
began to collect when I say we am in the
art center began to collect some of
these images and to create a kind of
database of something that you might
call outside a digital art and I
personally think that a lot of this is
just you know something that all of us
in this room probably do too which is
that that drive to sort of document our
lives and to see ourselves but I think
there's also a deeper a deeper thing
that's going on here which is about the
lack of culturally relevant imagery in
the media Aboriginal people in Australia
are it's maybe slightly improving in the
last year's but they're basically
invisible in the media unless it's a
negative story actually and often you
might see imagery of Aboriginal art
without seeing imagery or hearing from
Aboriginal people themselves so this has
led us to a project that we're currently
working on at the moment and it's an app
it's called mera worry and it's being
designed between myself and the Art
Center taking into account both of our
kind of goals and it's been really
fantastic because it's such a win-win
collaboration so from from the Art
Center side and the artist side there
really interested in having an app that
is culturally relevant to them so
instead of taking selfies or taking baby
photos with a picture frame that is
maybe about snow and Christmas or a
sunset over over the ocean they have
we've been working on developing an app
that is totally populated with world
free content
well well prove relevant content and I
mean as a as an outsider to that to that
art into that community it's just all so
stunningly beautiful you know so on the
left you can see my kind of version of
the snapchat flower crowns but in a well
pre way and so what we've developed is a
series of frames that you can you can
interact with then there's also what
we're calling masks which are basically
like a kind of still image that you can
interact with live with your phone your
camera and then there's a whole series
of these while pre emoji or digital
stickers so for the while pre elders in
the community the cultural advisors at
the Art Center it was really important
that the that the app include a lot of
relevant information and kind of
building blocks that they can use to
teach younger members of the community
about their cultural heritage so they
can put together the core owari designs
which are the designs that make up a
dream time story in Aboriginal culture
and it's very specific to each family
and to each cultural group and then
there's also a lot of just fun things
from around their communities so they
went out and they were taking photos
around the community which we've then
turned into also these kinds of stickers
that they can use to decorate their
photos and from my point of view and the
research that I've been doing this is a
really beautiful gesture against digital
colonialism it's reversing the trend of
only importing software and cultural
content and it's about sharing that
message with the outside world and I
mean I think a lot of people at the Art
Center are really motivated by this idea
to let other people know that their
culture is still alive and that it's ER
and so yes
to kind of see themselves outside of
their own small community so it is
something like sending a bottle from the
central Australian desert for the rest
of the world and we're really excited to
see how how it's going to be used around
the world and we were looking forward to
that
so the scheduled launch is in June and
we'll be monitoring and sharing
user-generated content potentially
incorporating some of the publicly
uploaded pieces into a physical
installation of the piece which will be
shown in an exhibition that I'm curating
later in the year in Germany which is
the second second iteration of this
exhibition it's called networking the
unseen I think that's about it so for
right now